Hello everyone.
Welcome to this premier video on fall
2025, Natick Town meeting.
I'm your moderator, Jeff Alderson.
I'm joined by town administrator Jamie Erickson.
Good to see you again. Thank you.
Jeff, we, this is starting our tradition.
I dunno if it's, we've been doing the prim video has been
doing for, for a long time, but Yes.
But you and I have been working together on telling people
what this is all about for a while, so Yes.
Glad to have you here. I'm excited to get into it.
Yeah, thank you. So, so let's get into it right from the top
with article one, usually spring
and fall we have these articles for committees
where whether it's, you know, town officers, boards
or committees can come up
and if they have a report to make,
they can do it under this article.
Correct. But no one's seeking the floor.
That's my knowledge, yes. So I,
as town administrators sponsored as just part
of the practice of sponsoring a number
of articles including this one on the committees.
And it's just an open-ended point opportunity,
like you mentioned, for any border committee in town
to report to town meeting.
I have not heard from anybody,
but at the time of the warrant that's in mid-August.
I, I don't want to hold off anybody that might be wanting
to, so you might even hear heading into town
meeting that somebody wants to report.
Okay. But at this time I'm not aware of anybody. Yeah.
And the finance committee, when it was heard, they moved
no action to no action
because there was nothing to be heard.
So likely there'll be no action on this.
And just the point to that,
that when we're talking about no action for,
for an article in the spring of 2025, you might recall
that we didn't use a consent agenda,
but we do plan to use a consent agenda for the fall meeting
and things that are relatively non-controversial,
like no action articles
or possibly unanimous favorable action from the finance
committee, we consider putting on the consent agenda.
Don't have that settled yet.
Look for that in the finance committee recommendation book.
If we we're planning to use one, it'll be listed
what motions are included.
And then that'll be, we will have
that procedural vote at the beginning
of town meeting on the first night hopefully accelerating
our review of, of all of what we have
to talk about on the warrant.
So article two, article two, budget, and,
and this is now we're talking about any,
is this really about changes to the budget from the,
the from the spring or Correct.
Yeah. Yes. And, and is there any,
any changes being proposed in the fall?
Actually no, there's no major changes on this one as well.
But we do have this also as a standing article
because we have two opportunities throughout the year to
amend the budget that's approved.
So this is the budget that was approved in April
by town meeting for the fiscal year.
Fiscal year is July one to June 30th.
And then we can do amendments twice a year after that.
Once at this fall town meeting
and then again at the Springtown meeting,
Springtown meetings towards the end of the fiscal year.
So it's really usually modified really
small changes at that point.
But this fall town meeting, sometimes we've done bigger
changes, but this year we're not seeking really any changes.
I believe we're seeking no action on that one at this time.
Yeah. And that, and that the way
that the article's written, it covers both the regular
operation and the government for the town plus the Morse
library and on neither points Correct.
Is there any action proposed? So again, correct. Yeah.
And that's required by Mass General Law that you have
to separate out libraries.
Right. So no action in article two.
We're moving right along. Yes.
So article three, rescinding authorized un isssued debt.
So my, tell me if I'm right about this.
So if we have, if town meeting has previously authorized
the town to enter into like to to borrow correct this,
but the town has not yet borrowed that amount,
this would basically pull back that authorization?
Correct. Alright. Yep.
And is there anything that's being pulled back
Again on this one?
No action, but again, this is one of those ones
that in August when we're setting the warrant out,
it makes sense for us to have it as a placeholder
because there could be items that we identify in the,
in the upcoming one to two months that we do want
to pull off of our, our list of potential debt.
It's, it's beneficial for the town
to do this on, on a regular basis.
And we do do this on a regular basis
because it's helpful with our, our bond rating
and just our overall fiscal practices and fiscal strength.
But to your point, this is just issued debt
that we have not authorized yet.
Actually there might be a small one on this one
that we are looking to un authorize.
It wasn't reviewed at the finance committee.
So if, if there is something to be made under article three,
it's likely someone would be moving
that from the floor at town meeting to possibly Yes.
Your project actually I think it might actually
be covered under another article.
So that's my my fault. There's a couple different ways
that we can do debt and in this one we're seeking no action,
but you'll see another article where we are seeking
to transfer some bond proceeds to another project.
Okay. We'll and we'll, we'll cover that one shortly.
Correct. Article four, unpaid bills.
It's, it's always interesting when this one comes up.
I think we spend a significant amount of time on the floor
of town meeting talking about unpaid bills.
And I think there's this general cons consensus of like,
how do we find ourselves in this situation?
Right, right. But if you're running a town
with a $200 million budget, things happen,
things arrive hundred percent late pe staff turnover.
Staff turnover, the email. Yep.
So maybe just kinda walk us through how,
how do we find an unpaid bill
and then what's this process
by which we get them paid? Yeah,
So first it's important to, to understand that we have
to follow very specific and,
and fairly strict guidelines from the state
regarding our finances.
Our fiscal year, as I noted is July one to June 30th.
At the end of the fiscal year, we basically have 15 days
to encumber funds from that prior fiscal year in order
to spend those monies by the, by the basically September,
it gives us basically a quarter to spend those monies.
If we don't spend those monies
or we don't get a bill from a, a contractor
that was from a prior fiscal year, we have
to close our books and then that goes, moves forward.
And the the way for us to pay the bill is to go back
to town meeting to get an appropriation for that bill.
And that appropriation would be coming from what source
of funds in the fall town meeting
It.
In the case of this upcoming fall town meeting,
we're looking to utilize state aid.
So our state aid number, we,
every year we get funding from the state
to cover various costs such as schools
and just general, general fund expenditures.
We estimate that going into the budget season in April,
but we never really know our number
until the state finalizes their budget, which is usually
around the July timeframe.
And this year we happen to have in excess
of about $300,000 in state aid.
So we're gonna repurpose portions of that
for, to cover this cost.
But in any given year it could be a different funding
source, it could be a free cash number, it could be just an
unended proceeds of that fiscal year.
We could have a, a balance that we didn't,
that we haven't spent yet, or it could be another
appropriation that we're repurposing for, for those
Costs.
And this year free cash is not yet certified
and it may not be certified in time for town meeting?
That's correct. Yeah. It's, it's a tight timeframe.
Any year we're, we're gonna be submitting it.
Free cash is basically at the,
this is why our fiscal year is so important.
The state requires us at the end of the end
of the fiscal year to close our books
and then any excess money.
So if we budgeted, you know, y amount of dollars
and we didn't spend that much,
that excess amount then is what's called free cash.
Along with anything that we might have over or under.
It's a calculation based on what we over or under estimated
or budgeted the prior year that Delta becomes,
in essence becomes our free cash number and,
but it has to be certified by the state
and once we get it certified, we can then appropriate it.
We mean town meeting can then appropriate it for purposes,
but all that has to happen between the end of,
or the beginning of July or the end of June.
And the certification process even at the state
level can take up to 30 days.
So that's a lot of a lot of paperwork for our staff to do
and then we have to get it to the state
and the state has to turn around to us.
So the likelihood of it really ever getting done
before town meeting is, is a high bar.
It's, it's certainly possible and we have had it happen.
Definitely. And that's our goal.
But really just getting it
to the state is a big bar as well.
And we are, we're actually soon
to be submitting it, I believe this week or next week.
And speaking of high bars, an unpaid bills article,
it requires a fourth fifths vote at town,
town meeting meeting and part of that is to make sure
that you absolutely are correct in,
in spending the money on those bills.
But as people like to say, we always like to pay our bills.
Correct. And there are bills that need to be paid.
Maybe talk us through like kind
of what's come in. Certainly, yes. What's
Being looked for?
Yeah, so there's about 30 to
$40,000 worth of bills this time.
You'll see the full detail in the fin income book,
the finance committee book definitely recommend everybody
reading that 'cause it's all in there.
And, and these are bills that we're obligated to pay that
for whatever reason they did not get paid in the fiscal year
and almost, I believe 90% of these bills, there might be one
or two bills that are from even a prior fiscal year,
but 90 to 95% of these bills are from last fiscal year.
So we just didn't get 'em in queue by
that July 15th deadline that I noted
where we can encumber funds.
So because we didn't either get the invoices from the
vendor, a number of them were from Amazon,
we just switched over to an Amazon business account
and in some cases it's the vendor
that just didn't get us their bill in time.
I believe that was the case with some of those.
Or there was some staff turnover that led to the bill being
in an email account that we,
we needed to get back to and check.
We just needed to be able
to have the appropriation to fund those bills.
There is one bill that's the bulk of the $30,000, $40,000
that I mentioned and that was for a new software upgrade
that we did that was just a, a a, a dialogue
between two departments that needed to happen.
And we just, we had that happen
but it just happened not in time
for the end of the fiscal year. Got
It.
Let's move on to article five.
Everyone's favorite topic stabilization funds. Yes.
The way the article's written, there are potentially four
funds that could be funded
and you know, I don't know if I have to go into the details
of all, all four of the definitions of the funds again,
but maybe focus on which funds you're, we're seeking Sure.
To put money into and just sort of talk about those
Specifically.
Absolutely. So our stabilization funds are basically
what some people might call our rainy day funds.
We have a number of accounts,
the primary ones are general operational and capital.
We do have a couple others and you mentioned there's a
number on there, but those are three
primary ones, I believe.
The other one is os other post-employment benefits. Okay.
Which is opep. Those are basically our
long-term liabilities as an employer.
And we do post to to that,
but the, the three primary ones that I mentioned
for the stabilization accounts are the ones that we more,
we regularly post the opep but it's usually once a year.
Whereas those other ones we try to post to more regularly
during town meeting season.
And the operation and
and general stabilization accounts are ones
that we pulled from, for example, during the pandemic when,
when our finances were were being hit cha were challenged
by some of the pandemic losses
and capital is really to help
long-term fund capital projects.
What we're looking to do at this town meeting is appropriate
what's called new growth,
which every year we have
investments that are happening in town.
So somebody on their on,
on their property might be adding an addition.
It could be a commercial property,
it could be a residential property.
Putting an addition on that is not at the beginning
of the year part of their tax assessment.
But at the end of the year that's added value.
We capture that added value, we estimate it for the year
and then at the end of the year we capture
whatever the total amount is
and the delta between what we estimated versus
what the actuals were is what we can then also appropriate.
So for example, going into the FY 26 budget season in April,
we estimated $1.1 million in new growth.
When we did the actuals, which happened at the end
of the fiscal year, we came up with a number
of about $2 million and that delta of about 800
to $900,000 we can then appropriate.
And that's what we're looking to do as part of this article
to put those funds into a stabilization accounts. How
Would you qualify the state of those
funds or those accounts?
Right now, a lot of people say,
is there a good number to have?
Yep. Where are we in terms of getting those numbers back to?
That's an excellent question. So we're back to,
so we have financial management principles that are adopted
by the select board and they're based on
guidance from both our finance team
but also our finance advisors informed also by state law
or state desired levels of, of,
and it depends on, on what it is,
but in the case of stabilization accounts,
it's usually targets for how much percentage of,
for example, our general fund revenue
an item might be for capital.
We don't really have a target. We just have, it's an account
that we can use and it might be more project based
or it might be program based.
Right now we're in the process of actually re-analyzing
what we should have for our capital.
We're not back to our pre pandemic levels, but that's okay.
We're we, we're still working to rebuild that with regards
to the general and operational stabilization.
Each one is a slightly different target
and I'm, I have to look, I don't have the in front of me,
but they're basically a percentage
of our revenue on an annual given basis.
So it, it, it, it increases each year,
but our goal is to really make those targets and that's
because our, our general revenue increases each year
with those two accounts.
With this appropriation, we're gonna be meeting our targets.
We're currently meeting our target
for the general stabilization account
and we're planning on putting about $400,000 into the
operational stabilization account
and that'll meet our target.
We're not back to pre pandemic levels. Right.
We were well above our targets during the pandemic
or pre pandemic, but it's, we're still meeting our targets
and that helps us with our AAA bond rating,
which helps us borrow money more cheaply for larger projects
and even smaller projects.
And it's just general good practice
for us when we do hit those
economically challenged times. Great.
Excellent. And just for people's edification as well,
because this was discussed in the spring,
it's a majority vote to put money into a stabilization fund,
but it's a two thirds vote to take money out of a
Stabilization.
That's my understanding as well. Yeah.
Some people always wonder like,
well how locked up is that money?
I just wanna make sure 'cause there's
been a lot of discussion about that.
That's actually how we, how we make sure that Correct. Yes.
It's used for the intended purpose. Right.
Alright, let's talk article six, which is great
'cause of where we are physically present.
I always like to say the article six is about our public
access and cable related fund for NAIC Pegasus.
And just see if I get my understanding of this right.
Every time someone pays their own individual cable bill,
there's a fee on that.
And that goes into an account that is set aside for,
you know, for for purposes for, for local and public access.
But it requires a a a, a act of town meeting to move
that money into the, into the account so that,
so like na Pegasus could spend it for use for operations.
Am I getting that generally corrected?
Generally correct. Okay.
So in in in essence under state law, you're correct there,
any, every cable subscriber pays a fee on their bill
that goes towards their communities,
local government access channel
or in our case Pegasus and Natick.
What the cable providers are required
to do though is they negotiate contracts
with each community, what that fee is
and what it then can or should be used for.
So we have, we, the town of Natick have contracts
with Verizon, Comcast,
and RCN that determines their tenure contracts
and they determine what that fee is
and then what they should be used
for operational versus capital.
And we base that on what the needs are,
but also what's realistic for a cable subscriber to pay.
And, and so that's done at the town level.
Pegas is actually a nonprofit.
So what town meeting is actually doing is it's taking those
fees that then get
provided to the town on a regular, regular basis.
Usually quarterly we get
wire transfers from those three providers
and we're transferring the monies from the town to Pegasus,
the nonprofit entity.
'cause Pegasus isn't negotiating the contracts, the town is,
we are not spending the money Pegasus is.
So we're taking in the money
and we're transferring it, the action of town meetings
to transfer that balance to Pegasus.
And it's basically, it's almost a one-to-one.
There's a small administrative fee
that I think the town holds onto just
because we had to cover some costs of, of holding the money
and, and making sure the
contracts are up to speed and everything.
But it's almost a near one-to-one transfer to Pegasus. One
Of the discussions that came up at the finance committee
was, do we see,
because we know that, you know, cord cutting is happening,
people are moving, they're, they're what they used
to consume for, for media, from cable bills
to like streaming services.
Are we seeing that happening in the
funding amounts that we're seeing?
And is there anything that, you know, whether,
not this meeting, but is there anything
that we're the town is considering in the future in terms
of other needs
or other funding sources to kind of offset those losses?
Yeah, that's a great question. That's been,
that's been coming up I think in
some of the, the feedback I've been
Hearing.
Yeah. It's definitely been something
that we've been monitoring as a, as a town as well as
as Pegasus with Pegasus.
And that's absolutely true.
It has been a noticeable trend to people cord cutting,
which means lower revenue
because it's based on the number of sub subscribers.
And it's a concern because right now to run the operation
of Pegasus, it's getting to the point I can't, I,
I don't wanna speak for Pegasus,
but my understanding is getting to the point
where the revenues are not always matching the expenses.
So the town will be asked at some point to fig to to,
to determine what to do next.
Like I said, we're talking with Pegasus on what
that can look like, what that means for the community.
We feel that Pegasus is a great resource.
We, the town town administration feel
that Pegasus is a great resource for the town.
They're a great partner. They,
they record programs like this,
but they also record all of our select board meetings, all
of our planning board meetings and really any other program
and a lot of other meetings, sporting events, the high
School, local
High school football.
Yeah. They're, they're, they have three channels on,
on cable and they also do a live streaming service
through their Pegasus website.
But they have a, you know, education channel,
a government channel and a basically a school
or edu other channel that, or program channel
and it, it's, yeah, sporting events, town meetings
and town meeting and other programs.
So Pegasus helps us out by, by recording a lot of our,
our community meetings
or government meetings like, like select board
and planning, board and finance committee and others.
And they're just a great resource for the community.
So long term we do definitely need to figure that out.
It's probably gonna be in the next two to five years
that we're gonna see some real need for potential action.
We're not sure what that action actually is yet,
but you'll start seeing more public high.
Okay. Dialogue about that.
Great. Thanks for the detail on that. Yeah.
Article seven is about collective bargaining,
meaning bargaining between the select board and unions.
Correct. Maybe tell us a little bit about which unions are
in the mix this time and Sure.
And what the outcomes are and what's being
looked to be funded here.
Sure. So collective bargaining on the non-school side
because school collective bargaining agreements are handled
by the school committee per state law.
But on the non-school side,
and this includes our facilities department,
there's a union that that oversees facilities like
custodians, laborers
and DPW supervisors in DP W2 police unions,
patrol officers and superior officers, two fire unions,
firefighters and deputy firefighters
and custodian clerical unions.
So we have about nine unions in town.
We are required to negotiate contracts up to three years
for their employment terms and, and, and compensation.
And the way the town ratifies
or finalizes those contracts,
yes they're negotiated the terms
and negotiated by the select board,
but the appropriation of funds happens at town meeting
and that ultimately finalizes the contract for purposes
of acting on the contract.
And so what's happening this town meeting is,
there's two contracts both in the police department,
it's the patrol officers and the superior officers
that we've, they were, they were expired actually in June,
but we've successfully negotiated them at the select board
level and now town meetings act to asked
to basically appropriate those funds.
I mean that's what's happening. The bulk
of the other contracts are already up to speed.
We had them at prior town meetings,
they're good for three years.
So you're gonna see some of the DPW and the custodian
and the clerical probably in about two years time.
We are still working with the firefighters
union, but that's still in progress.
Okay. Good to know.
Article eight transfer un expended bond proceeds again,
see if I get this one right, if we have borrowed money, yes.
But we have not yet used all of that money
and that project is concluded, this allows town meeting
to redirect that borrowed
yet unspent money towards a similar type of project.
That's correct. Yep.
And the similar type projects is important there
because it's typically, it's the term in the borrowing field
is useful life or, or a similar useful life.
So for example, if you borrow
for a vehicle which has a useful life of about five years
or 10 years, depending on the vehicle, those funds
that you borrow for, if you didn't spend all of those funds
can be reauthorized for a similar useful life project.
So another vehicle or something that has a five
to 10 year lifespan building projects tend
to have a 20 year lifespan.
Whether that's an actual new construction building
or a system like A-H-V-A-C system or a roof or, or windows.
So if you don't spend all the money on one
of those projects, you can then
reappropriate it for a like project.
Right. And that's, that's the, that's the key.
It has to be a use similar useful
Life.
And so are there projects
being proposed here under article eight?
You mentioned earlier on there might be one that was coming.
I believe this one actually is seeking no action as well.
If there is it's, I believe it's one that was related to
a, actually no we were, we were holding off
and it's gonna be part of a capital article.
Okay. But it was about a hundred thousand dollars
that we were holding back on some of the borrowing for
that We were repurposing for a like project,
but we had to change slightly the
appropriation language of town meeting.
And that's, that's important if you're,
if if town meeting language is specific to a project,
you have to use it for that project.
But if you're using it for another project
or a broader project, you still have to go back
to town meeting to seek their authorization to adjust
that, that borrowing. Right.
So as of right now, based on what went
through the finance committee, there's
no action, no action on this one.
Correct. Action. Move article eight i I also want
to pause here and draw, draw something.
'cause a question had come up about,
and I I know you're not really gonna speak to the substance
of Article 10, which is around appropriation for
of school feasibility study for a new memorial school.
But there was a question that had come in,
and this is, this has come up in the discussion of, of of,
of the transferring of the of of funds.
People have asked the question,
is there unused funds from left over from the Kennedy School
project and could that be used
and spent against the Memorial school feasibility study?
And the answer is no.
And my understanding is this
because the, it's the, the, like you said, the, the term
of the original bond proceeds for the Kennedy school was
for a 20 year project.
But a feasibility study is not a 20 year project.
It's actually just considered a five year project. Correct.
And so that would disqualify it for like project correct
Use that's that useful life of the project.
So a feasibility study or, or a engineering study
or a schematic design for like building projects.
Those are considered under a master general law
to be a five year term.
Whereas an actual building,
physical construction is a 20 year term.
Right. So that 20 year borrowing,
we do have some remaining funds
because you borrow for sometimes a larger amount
or in the case of the Kennedy,
we also got more reimbursement from the state.
Right. So you have to borrow for an amount
'cause you have to do the project and then at the end
of the project say, okay, okay, we had some money left over.
So kudos to us for, for not having to ask for more money,
but there's money left over that we can repurpose.
But it has to be for a like project or a
Useful life.
So, and again, without going too,
too many details about Article 10,
but assuming Memorial school project goes farther down
and they move to the construction phase, maybe
that would be the time to look at transferring
The money.
Yeah. Assuming there's still funding there
because you, you can reappropriate it
for other projects between now and then.
Right. That could be a couple years out.
So town meeting could choose to, for example,
reappropriate those funds for other
similar building type projects.
So we need a new HVAC system at school A, B, C
or a town building X, Y, Z,
we could re reappropriate a portion of those Kennedy funds
for that purpose 'cause it has a similar useful life.
Okay. So thank you for going into the detail.
'cause I think a lot of people are asking
question like why aren't we doing it now?
Right. And and the answer is we really can't. Right? Yeah.
So our bond counsel, legal counsel
said, Nope, do not do that.
Okay. You could, you could risk actually the
terms of your borrowing.
Alright,
Let's dig into article nine,
which is really about our capital equipment
and improvement projects.
And plan what's on the list this year for, for
for big ticket items or small ticket items
to, to purchase for capital?
Sure. So the capital program
for this this fall is actually pretty light.
And we did that deliberately.
We did it deliberately in the spring as well. If you recall.
We were working on the override.
We weren't totally sure what funding we're gonna have
to play to, to, to not play, to, to utilize
or to to, to fund capital at the SPRINGTOWN meeting.
And we're still working through that analysis now.
We have a new, i I call it a CFO role,
but a new deputy town administrator for finance.
Ari Skye who's gonna, you're gonna meet at town meeting
folks at home and we're gonna meet at town meeting
and we're working with Ari
and his team to really look at our full structure
of our debt analysis to understand how can we for the next
five plus years looking forward, better handle our debt,
which is a big driver and, and how we fund capital.
If you look at our capital program on any given year,
we're required to do a five year update on, in January,
well we publish it in January.
We, the months leading up to is when we do the capital work.
And we typically have on the general revenue side,
anywhere from 12 to $17 million worth
of projects on any given one year.
It gets more as you go years
out 'cause it's a five year program.
But that's because you just sort of add on some projects
that, that you have rougher ideas of the true numbers.
But the first year out, which is when you have a higher idea
of the numbers, it's usually about 12 to $15 million,
12 to $17 million.
This past year we're actually deferring about
$10 million worth of projects.
So what's on there, the big ticket item is really a new fire
truck that is on there
because we have to get a borrowing authorization in order
to even order the truck.
And the fire trucks usually take about three to plus years
to, before we even need to pay for it
because that's how long it takes to manufacture.
Some of the other parts of the capital program are also
funding our enterprise fund.
We have two enterprise funds in town.
One helps to manage the golf course,
the Saman Trace golf course and one
and helps to manage our water and sewer program.
And those are self-funded entities.
That's why they're, they have an enterprise fund.
So in the case of the golf course, for example,
the greens fees pay for the operations of the golf course.
So we have a separate fund that the revenue comes in
and the revenue goes out and it funds itself.
Town meetings still needs to authorize capital in
that case for enterprise funds.
Same with the water sewer division, the rate payers pay
for the actual operations and capital of the program.
And both those cases, they're fairly routine items
that are being ordered as part of, of the capital program.
I don't have the details in front of me right now,
but definitely look in the finance committee book.
It is a light program this fall deliberately
with the understanding that we're gonna be revamping our
program coming into January
and then you'll see years ahead
where we're gonna get back into the robustness
Of it and in anticipating a good bit
of healthy discussion on the floor of town meeting.
I know our town meeting members love to talk about vehicles.
Yeah. Firetruck in particular fire trucks.
I really appreciate the interest,
but if you all could just please do, go through the book
and look at the details about what, read the book
On the details.
Yep. Fire and and why it is the long lead time.
I didn't know it would take 36 months
to order a firetruck and get it delivered.
But 360 months, 300, no,
360, 36 months, sorry.
400 days. Wow. 405. It was even more during the pandemic.
They were up closer to, I forgot
how much the last firetruck was,
but we're just about to get a new firetruck,
but it takes multiple years.
So by the time we actually get a new one, we have
to be ordering the next one
because it's a, it's a, it's a good five year process
when you take into account the, the
appropriation process through town meeting
and then also the ordering and, and picking it up
and then paying for process for
A truck that costs over a million dollars
Yes. As delivered.
Yep. And they're getting,
they're getting up there in price.
Amazing. One to 1.5 million depending on the extras.
So to skip ahead to talk about the last couple of things,
which are, are, are three articles, 16, 17, 18.
They're all very similar. It's around street acceptance.
So maybe for the folks that understand, depending on
where you live, you might be more familiar
with street acceptance or, or not.
Yep. Maybe talk about what the street acceptance program is,
what it means to have an accepted street
and then what's going on with articles 16, 17
and 18 about which streets and and why they're showing up
Now.
Absolutely. Yep. So the, the town's streets right of ways
is the term that we sometimes use are, most
of them are public property.
So they, they were built either
way back in the day when they were known as county roads
or if they were built more
recently as part of a subdivision.
They were built by a private developer.
And at the end of that project they were transferred
or gifted or donated or gifted.
They were given to the town from that private developer.
We don't inherently own land the town, we have
to either buy it ourselves or we had to be provided it.
So in the case of our streets, we have, in the case
of more newer subdivisions, a developer will buy a piece
of property, build a road, build the houses off the road,
and then at the end of that project, they'll gift the road
with all of, assuming it's built to, to our standards.
'cause we have certain minimum standards
for roadways gift the road to the town.
In order for that to happen, town meeting actually needs
to accept that gift.
In the case of 16 and 17, 16 is Jennifer Circle.
It's a small road off of SP Street.
It's got, I believe four houses on it.
It was built in the nineties as far
as we can tell from the record.
Is it, it was an approved subdivision, went
through the approval process, subdivision need
to be approved by the planning board,
and they go through staff overview when they're being built,
it was built to town standards first.
Whatever reason, the developer at the end of
that project never gifted the town the road.
So we don't, we don't just gain ownership over land.
We have to be provided it or we have to accept it or buy it.
In the case of Jennifer Circle, we were never given,
the town was never given that ownership.
So therefore it's owned by either the private developer
still, or in the case of many streets like this,
the abutters to the streets.
So if you're on a unaccepted road,
if you live on an accepted road
or you have property on accepted road,
in all likelihood you might own to the center line of
that road for the frontage that you're on.
Doesn't mean that you can do anything with that really,
because people still have the right to pass
and re-pass over that roadway layout.
But you technically, the ownership of
that fee simple land is by the,
those a budding property owners. So if you're,
So if you're a property owner that's an abut
or two, an unaccepted road, what does that practically mean?
What, what what is actually happening
or not happening with your Yeah,
So what that practically means is, and
and a lot of people look at this more from who's gonna be
maintaining it or who's gonna be doing well to it.
That's what I mean. Yeah, exactly.
By and large it just means that the town, the town
of Natick, we can't spend money to upgrade that road.
We can spend money to upgrade
any public utilities within that road.
So for example, if there's a water line or a sewer line,
because we likely have an easement that runs with
that water line or sewer line.
And so we can spend money to upgrade that,
but we can, we can't really repave that road
to, to a new standard.
It'd really have to be up to the abutters
to figure out how to pay for that.
Hmm. With that said, we've worked on,
because we have a number of unaccepted roads in town,
we've adopted a policy that if a road meets certain criteria
and they're good candidates to be accepted,
we don't wanna necessarily penalize
the property owners for that purpose.
It could just be in the case of like Jennifer Circle,
the developer just never transferred it over to the town.
We wanna make that easy because it's, it's, it's just a,
a fairness component for, for abutters to those properties
that to those roads that were built to our standards.
And so we have a process in the case of Jennifer Circle,
for example, that went through our process,
our engineering division, reviewed the history of
that project, looked at the existing condition
of the current road, saw that it met standards, saw that
yet it's not in the best condition,
but it's not gonna take a lot of additional work
for the town to bring it up to our standards.
Meaning there aren't major drainage issues.
There aren't major right of way issues.
'cause some roads that are more,
that are older might have different layout widths
or might de like, might, might have variable layout lifts,
widths, which make it more challenging for the town
to do regular maintenance
and to, to make it, to make it a good viable candidate
for an accepted road.
And Jennifer Circle is not one of these
And to accept the road, there's no cost
or appropriations with the active acceptance
that might show up in a budget later on.
Correct. Because it might lift Yeah.
The expense of, of supporting that road in the
Future.
Correct. In essence, what that means is we can add it,
the town can add it to our roadway improvement program.
We have a five year roadway improvement program
whereby every, every year we get it voted on by,
by the select board as our roadway commissioners.
But in essence we have a budget on an annual basis.
It's usually around two to $3 million.
It's part capital part state funded.
It's called chapter 90 funding,
whereby we can only spend those money on,
on accepted roadways.
And if it's an accepted roadway, it gets put into the queue
of all of our accepted roadways in town.
So in the case of Jennifer Circle, for example,
it's now gonna be added to that five year roadway program,
which we actually happen to be updating soon.
So we're gonna have a new batch of roadways
that can be then funded based on our budget assumptions,
based on need across the entirety of the town
that'll be reviewed by the select board.
They usually review that every, every year in
March, April timeframe.
And so we talked about Article 16,
which was Jennifer Circle, right?
Article 17 is Graystone Lane, same deal.
But are there any particular
Aspects to that project?
Well, this is the example of a developer
that finished the road just recently
and is now asking for the town to accept it built
to our standards meets all of our requirements.
It's new, so there's,
there's nothing for us to do right now.
And this is the developer that actually is asking for us
to, to accept the road.
So it's a good example.
Jennifer Circle's a good example of, of a roadway
that was built to our standards in
the nineties, but was never asked.
Now we're just doing it sort of 30 years later.
Whereas Graystone was asked
by the developer just recently
completed for town acceptance.
In the case of Graystone, we actually did this vote
town meeting, took this vote actually last fall.
And in order for us to finish the process paperwork-wise on
the back end, we have to bring the town meeting vote along
with the, the plan records to the registry of deeds.
There was just a, an administrative step that we needed
to go back and do again,
which is why it's coming back
in front of us. Okay. From the town
Meeting this in, in case people are paying attention
to part of that project before
It, it's, it sounds like we're doing it again.
It's because we are
In article 18, which is Boden Lane,
but that one's a little different.
You're not seeking any action from from town meeting at this
time on article 18,
Correct?
Yeah, these three roads are, are perfect example
of the various different types
of roads that we have in town.
So in the case of Bowden Lane, there's a a,
this is really just for the right of way
that's over the train tracks.
Okay. And in essence, that right of way dates back
to the town acceptance from the 17 hundreds.
Wow. And the case of the, of that town acceptance,
it was done during a time when there were really no modern
plans like we have today
where you have surveyed plot plants.
It was, it was literally like a a this rod to this rod
by this tree to this.
And so when you read the right of way wording
it, it, it, it's hard to match up to existing conditions.
We know it's been accepted and we have all these abutting
properties that have done their plans.
With that in mind, we just need to do a set of plans for
that, that that spot
of Rodden Lane going over the train tracks.
And in essence, what we weren't sure
of when town meeting warrant was being closed in in August
was will we need a town meeting action in this case we've
determined after August, but
before town meeting that in fact we do not,
we've confirmed the record that it was an accepted way.
We just need to put together a plan that shows
where all these other plans go to
and then that is our, our, our right of way
that then the select board connection can access.
So there's no action required,
There's no action required for town meeting.
But I don't want people to have that context just
'cause it's important while we're seeking no action. Yeah.
Yeah. And so on that point, if you're keeping score at
home, there's a lot of articles that have no action on it.
And so we're gonna try
to get them all on a consent agenda plus some other articles
as well that have a unanimous favorable
recommendation for the finance committee.
Hopefully that'll make some short work
of our town meeting this fall.
Jamie, thank you as always.
Thank you for coming in and talking about the details.
Please do look at the finance committee recommendation book
for additional details about
everything that we talked about here. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much.